Introduction
The right to asylum is a human right. "Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution." (UN, 1948) Though how 'persecution' is supposed to be defined and evaluated is quite a complex subject. This work does not claim to find a functional definition of what freedom from persecution should mean in the context of Swedish migration law. Instead, it aims to contribute a critical design concept to its evaluation process. It is argued that there be a great need for using interaction design methods together with social-, language- and cultural studies to yield knowledge about a group of people that are today mostly unrecognized or underrepresented in the design- and technology industry.


In Sweden, the evaluation of the 'need for protection' is mainly based on an 'asylum evaluation interview.' The refugee seeking asylum have his/her refugee status evaluated by a caseworker but whether the applicant is allowed to stay or not is mainly based on this interview. The evaluation interview is also where the applicant can hand in evidence; the burden of providing evidence lay on the applicant, but any document/information is accepted. (The weight of the evidence is evaluated by the case worker, however.) Communication is more often than not quite difficult, and often both translator and legal counsel is needed to perform the interview with an adequate result. If there is a need for protection from persecution, the applicant is granted asylum in Sweden.
There are two large problems with the Swedish refugee status evaluation process. (1) It is not fast enough; because of high demand or other limitations the waiting time is directly hazardous for refugee seekers and delay their ability to support themselves. (2) The evaluation is mainly grounded in a rather complex interview in which small nuances in interpretation can have large consequences for the final decision.
This work, therefore, starts off with an exploration of the evaluation interview, together with an effort to map the situation and process around it. This because of a couple of reasons. (a) The refugee status evaluation interview is where a case is started. (b) In addition to this, it is one of few times when the asylum seeker meets their case worker. (c) Because the situation often demands an interpreter to be present the communication can be complex. (d) Additionally, there is an opposing nature in this situation; one side (the asylum applicant) tasked with proving their need for asylum while the other side (the caseworker / Swedish Migration Agency) attempting to evaluate if asylum should be granted or not.
Delimitations
The main goal is to create a design with high usability that is aimed to be used in a specific situation by a defined user group. However, problems and opportunities are not only being looked for inside the interview room. The experiential quality in the interview situation is taken to be trust between the stakeholders. A positive design result would then increases trust between the parties. Therefore the work is free to explore opportunities and problems around the situation, place, and user group if the defined experiential quality is affected positively.
The design should not take the focus away from the interview. It should enhance the meeting between the refuge and the handler, not deduct from that experience. Mainly because of the positive design result expressed above; but also because of the ethical implications of introducing any tool with the potential to influence the outcome in a legally complex scenario. Furthermore, the fact that many in the main user group suffer some form of trauma must be well understood when conducting any participatory research.
Also to be aware of is the fact that going through the refugee evaluation process takes time and while going through it the applicants will often experience much stress and anxiety. Finally, it is to note that the main difficulty needed to overcome in interviews with stakeholder–such as communication problems, lack of trust, stress, and feelings of uncertainty–share many similarities with the design situation.
Design process overview
The design process model will be arranged in three main parts; the discovery phase, the design phase, and the delivery phase. The discovery phase is the preparation of experiments, contact creation, preliminary interviews and finding some first design direction.
After that, the design phase takes over. This includes extensive field work, interviews, and other studies to ground the current design direction. In reality, working in less understood context often leads to an oscillating between these two phases, going back and forth between the discovery phase and the design phase.
The design phase will be taking advantage of prototyping, together with other forms of testing to validate the result. This may generate new directions and reveal new opportunities which will be handled in another iteration of the design phase. Alternatively, it will validate the current design direction and design concept. The design phase of the work is a quick but iterative process; it will, therefore, take up most of the time. 
The last stage is the delivery phase. Here, the final design is completed, the result is analyzed, and future design directions within the design space are identified.
Goals and aims
This work aims to do two main things. Firstly, explore the context/situation of the asylum evaluation interview using interaction design methods to reveal specific problems and opportunities. Secondly, design tools for overcoming these problems and taking advantage of non-utilized opportunities.


________________


Background
Global refugee situation and its effect on Swedish migration policies
The Swedish process for applying and being granted asylum is complex. In recent years, 2015-2016 especially, the number of people applying for asylum in EU countries has gone up markedly. (Eurostat, 2017) 2015 statistics from UNHCR show 65 million people displaced by war and persecution, the highest numbers ever recorded. This means that globally 1 in every 113 people "...is now either a refugee, an asylum-seeker or internally displaced". (UN News Center, 2016) More than 50% of all refugees come from only three countries: Syria, Afghanistan, and Somalia but asylum applications in EU come from Syria, Afghanistan, and Iraq. (UNHCR, 2016) (Eurostat Press Office, 2016) 2015 also saw European Union register 1.2 million first time asylum seekers, double the year before. From this 156 110 asylum applications were registered in Sweden. (Eurostat Press Office, 2016)
This has strained the European countries ability to process asylum applications. For Sweden, this resulted in a new law regarding accepting asylum applications. From the 24 of November 2015, the new law changed the previous praxis of granting permanent residence permit to people with refugee status or subsidiary protection status to a temporary residence permit. (SFS 2017123) The new law also severely limits the possibility of family reunification. (Migrationsinfo, 2017)


The 12th of November 2015 Sweden started a temporary internal border control, and the 4th of January 2016 Sweden and Denmark both do controls of valid identification before entering the countries borders, as well as internal border control. (Øresundsinstituttet, 2017) Just like the new law, these actions are temporary. The new law is only valid for three years and the id- and border control must be renewed every six months. (SFS 2017123)(SFS 20151073) There is shown to be an 88% decrease of first-time asylum applicants in Sweden between the third quarter 2015 and the third quarter 2016. (Eurostat, 2017) These numbers reflect the increased difficulty in moving inside the European Union countries. (Migrationsinfo, 2016)
Even though the number of asylum applications has gone down from 2015 the waiting times have spiked. Swedish Migration Agency's (from here on called SMA) own quality report confirms that the average waiting time increased from 237 days 2015 to 500 days 2016. (Migrationsverket, 2017(1)) The temporary residence permits for people with subsidiary protection status are also to be renewed every 13 months. SMA currently has not decided to what extent these cases will need to be re-reviewed. (Interview with SMA case worker, 2017) Regardless of the coming re-evaluation process, the SMA is under a heavy workload, and the slow process of getting even a temporary residence permit affect the asylum seekers mental health and well-being. Especially amongst children and young people coming to Sweden on their own. (SVT Nyheter, 2016)


A young person fleeing from war and persecution, have traveled through Europe under harsh conditions, come to the final destination just to be met by an extremely slow bureaucratic process. Often the process of evaluating asylum takes years, and even if the result is a residence permit, this is temporary. The person is again requested to renew their application every 13 months. The evaluation needs to achieve legal certainty, and therefore the processing takes time. However, the process creates so much uncertainty that mental health problems are triggered, if not created. Case workers at SMA are also affected by a prolonged process, and SMAs own report shows that many of them say that they have been exposed to some form of pressure to grant/deny asylum. (Migrationsverket, 2016)
