Theory
Swedish migration law
There are three main instances in Sweden that make rulings in migration cases. Swedish migration agency, the migration court and the higher migration court. (Adenfelt, 2016, p.40) A result from SMA can be appealed to migration court. Rulings by the migration court can be appealed to the higher migration court but only if the specific case is granted a review permit. The higher migration court’s main task is to guide the lower migration courts and the SMA in their decisions. Only cases that which rulings may be deemed as possible guiding is granted a review permit. (Stern & Wikström, 2016, p.26)
        Since the higher migration court only help SMA by guiding rulings there has been a lack of centralised country information available for SMA’s usage. As an effort to create a consistent and more effective process the SMA has developed a number of ‘legal positions’ which are documents with internal guidance relating to specific questions. These are however not formally legal sources and even though a case worker that depart from this guidance would possibly be questioned the guidings themself are informal and created internally within the institution that follow them. (Stern & Wikström, 2016, p.46) This can be said to be problematic and at worst create arbitrary evaluations. They have on occasion according to Stern & Wikström even been used by the migration court. This grant them a legal position which they do not actually possess. (Stern & Wikström, 2016, p.47)

The institution that handles all cases are the SMA. The SMA have several goals, among these are a high legal quality in its evaluations, providing a service that meets the different stakeholders demands and counter any abuse of the rules it upholds. (Migrationsverket, 2017(1), p.14)
The process of getting asylum in Sweden
The right for asylum is covered by Swedish law "Utlänningslagen", the Aliens Act, chapter 4 and 5. Basically anyone that is given refugee status or subsidiary protection status will be granted asylum. (SFS 2005:716) This in accordance with article 14 from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 (UN, 1948), expanded in the Geneva Convention 1951 Relating to the Status of Refugees. (UNHCR, 1967)

Anyone can apply for asylum by handing in their application to a SMA office or border police. At their website SMA states that it is not possible to apply before coming to Sweden. After that the seeker is called to a SMA office, registered, photographed and fingerprints are taken. (Migrationsverket, 2017 (2))
        After this a first meeting is held with the applicant, where the process is explained, a public counsel is presented and, if underage or under other special circumstances, a custodian is appointed. (Interview with SMA worker, 2017)
The evaluation
In Swedish asylum evaluations it is up to the asylum seeker to prove that they are in need of protection from persecution. (Stern & Wikström, 2016, p.170) In sweden the evidence is presented and a complete story is written down in an evaluation interview. (Migrationsverket, 2017(2)) This is then collected in a document that is the foundation for the individual case. The document is presented to the applicant and the public counsel and it is read through and discussed to find any incorrect information. When the document is accepted the case evaluation is started by the caseworker. (Asylrättstudenterna - Introduction to asylum and migration law, 2017)
        The result of an asylum case evaluation depends on three main things. (1) The evidence presented by the applicant and the applicant's story. This is the document created from the evaluation interview. (2) Available country information, previous court rulings, and other official documents. (3) A believability analysis, i.e. how likely the applicants story is. (Stern & Wikström, 2016)
Criticism and Swedish migration agency’s own quality reports
The time between application, evaluation and decision have all increased markedly in 2016 according to SMA’s own quality assessment. (Migrationsverket, 2017(1)) Several sources points out that the contact between the asylum seeker and SMA is limited to a few occasions. (Adenfelt, 2016, s.64) Swedish radio describe poorly explained decisions and interview rooms with glass-walls out towards the public areas. (SR - Kaliber, 2017)
        Furthermore the same radio show also conduct interviews relating to SMA’s quality assessment report. It reinforce what has been noted earlier, that long waiting times before the interview creates large amounts of stress. It also reveal two problematic aspects about the evaluation document created from the interview, (1) the document is not necessarily written by the attending caseworker performing the interview, and (2) it seems questionable that country information is constantly included in the document. (SR - Kaliber, 2017)
Interpretation, practicalities and trust
It has been shown by Gartley & Due (2016) that in therapeutic conversations refugees prioritised practicalities such as getting answer to housing issues and other practical questions before trust and a deeper connection could be established. That a person that is worried about their housing situation should have questions around this or focus on this should come to no one’s surprise but in terms of the specific needs from refugees it raises a good point. Having unclear or shifting living conditions or otherwise having difficult living conditions with unclear terms create uncertainty and worries that affect the person's ability to connect with helpers and can disrupt that person's ability to connect to others as well.
        Furthermore, the same study showed several problems with using interpreters. It was common for refugees to show a heightened fear that an interpreter would break the confidentiality agreement. This would again impact the refugees ability to speak freely. (Gartley & Due, 2016)
Design politics
In his 2016 doctoral thesis, Keshavarz discuss the type of extraordinary emergency our society seem to live through from time to time. One type of such emergency would be the different ongoing conflicts in Syria and Afghanistan for example, leading to the displacement of millions  of people. Keshavarz says that “While they may look exceptional or temporary for those in power and in privileged positions, they are permanent conditions for those who, despite struggles and hope, have lost their histories and are thus deprived of the possibility of action, for distributing their knowledge, for making their politics visible.” For Keshavarz, a designer’s work is tightly coupled to, not only a result of, either design or politics. “The question of whose problems and issues are represented, and how certain things, moments, activities, encounters, beings and interactions come to be represented and experienced as problems, as subject for possible change, facilitation or improvements by design, often falls outside of the agenda of these approaches to design.” (Keshavarz, 2016, p.359)
        He suggest  a type of positional recognition to help designers see beyond the typical complexities and problems. This positional recognition is an introspective activity for the designer, an inclusion of one’s personal positions, norms and values and explicitly bring this into the design process. (Keshavarz, 2016, p.363)
Service design in design research
Forlizzi & Zimmerman argues 2013 for the inclusion of service design in interaction design processes. A service is described as a “[...] set of choreographed interactions between a customer and service provider.” However, they argue that service design, unlike interaction design allow the designer to identify opportunities in many different touch-points and with taking into consideration multiple different stakeholders. (Forlizzi & Zimmerman, 2013, p.2)


“[...] Service designers work to find solutions at the intersection of the service provider’s and the customer’s needs.” (Forlizzi & Zimmerman, 2013, p.3)


For Forlizzi & Zimmerman, service design has several benefits over interaction design. Most interesting for this work is the fact that it explicitly is systematic and holistically and the ability to within service design take into consideration all form of value creating opportunities. (Forlizzi & Zimmerman, 2013, p.2) For example using a service can generate data that can provide a better service which generates even more data.
One specific example they give where service design can be of great benefit is designing for societal change. (Forlizzi & Zimmerman, 2013, p.9) Again it is the focus on explicit systems that make service design better suited for such a project since it can take into consideration not only the specific user’s need but also the policy making and the economic aspects, the societal influences. 


The limitations with service design are also brought up, especially the type of framing used in service design with customer and provider. That this is a complex issue that designers need to be aware of–and to some degree even question–is acknowledged. (Forlizzi & Zimmerman, 2013, p.10) But the extent of this limitation is not fully explored.
Another difficulty with Forlizzi & Zimmerman is that working holistically is practically impossible. According to Stickdorn & Schneider (2011) “Genuinely working in a holistic way is an illusion, it is simply impossible to consider every aspect of a service. However, the intention should always be to see the wider context in which a service process takes place.” (Stickdorn & Schneider, 2011, p.44) As a designer it is necessary to create deliminations, maybe even to a larger extent when working holistically. Again the problem of the designers own position, the designers background, inheritance and political and cultural positions informs these deliminations. 
The role of design research artefacts
This work strived to include a large number of external partners. To an extent it has been somewhat successful in the earlier stages but as we shall see below a shift in approach had to be adopted after the exploration phase of the design work.
In an article by Jon Kolko he describe the act of design work as a ‘synthesis’, a sort of fusion of multiple different aspects and perspectives into a cohesive whole. This, he writes, “[...] indicates a push towards organisation, reduction and clarity.” (Kolko, 2010) This “synthesis” is then taken to found the basis of the actual design.


In a work like this, where the aim is to produce design research, to create and document a design synthesis if you will, the transparency of the work performed goes without saying. However, Kolke goes on to describe the difficulties with this when it comes to client work, non-academic work. When working with partners or clients outside of the design context he describe a problem of implicit practice of design research. There exists a real danger that this part of the design process is lacking a “artifact procedural trail” and that the client lack understanding of the decisions that created the final design or concept. As a result this part of the process is seldom formally accounted for since it is not understood by the client because the connection between synthesis and the deliverables are not made explicit. (Kolko, 2010)
         Kolko’s article is arguing for making these activities explicit. Again, this is obvious in academic work. But this idea about making synthesis tangible for clients is also interesting in earlier stages, even before clients or partners, especially when going outside of the design context to find partners. The idea here is that explicit synthesis, tangible design research, is a good tool for communicating design goals in a non designer context. 


A design research artefact is then some type of tangible result from a design method executed to explore an area of interest. For example, a prototype, a mind-map or a wall of post-its. This will in turn be used to communicate or–to an extent–convince participation for further design work. Some form of preliminary artefact should be presented to also give example of why design research should be performed.
UI and accessibility
Blair-Early & Zender (2008) talk about the vague but often used terms of easy-to-use and intuitive in designing user interfaces noting that an “intuitive interface” often is equal to familiarity. (Blair-Early & Zender, 2008, p.86) Familiarity can be described as using an existing and recognised design pattern so as to grant users affordance and understanding of the interface without having to teach them how it works.
This idea about familiarity is correctly seen as problematic by Blair-Early & Zender since it do not lend well to innovation practises or even progress for that matter. Instead they identify some core principles when designing interfaces. By analysing content type, content delivery strategy, user intention and content structure they came up with ten design principles for designing interfaces. Obvious start, clear reverse, consistent logic, observing conventions, give feedback to user interaction, create clear reference points (landmarks), observe proximity of interface elements and content, adapt interface to useage, provide help and maximize content. (Blair-Early & Zender, 2008, p.99)


Of these the odd one out is the principle of adapting the interface to the usage. This is not explained as responsive or adaptive design where in a webpage or interface is built to handle multiple devices and to be able to provide the same content or device specific content. This principle is about adapting the interface to their individual usage. It should perhaps have been explained as a customisation feature, but even then its place among the other principles seems a bit off.


Norman (2013) list his seven stages of an action. These are defined as seven questions a user may have about a product:
“1. What do I want to accomplish?
2. What are the alternative action sequences?
3. What action can I do now?
4. How do I do it?
5. What happened?
6. What does it mean?
7. Is it okay? Have I accomplished my goal?” (Norman, 2013, p.71)


These questions then lead Norman to create “seven fundamental principles of design”. Discoverability, feedback, conceptual model, affordances, signifiers, mappings and constraints. (Norman, 2013, p.72)


Miraz et. al (2016) discuss the difficulties with user interface design in a multilingual environment or use case. They list some common usability problems that can arise. Some of the more relevant problems are text and graphics alignment, automatic language selection based on ip address, cultural dependent significance of color, automated translation and difficult to translate abbreviations. (Miraz et. al, 2016, p.433)


Cooper (2014) go through different usability areas. Four areas are looked at; learnability, customizability, localisation, and accessibility. Every area needs to be addressed in a specific interface design and Cooper bring up a lot of helpful guidelines when working within these areas. (Cooper, 2014)
Different digital methods for retrieving data are also brought up by Cooper (2014). Positional retrieval is when a user remember the “place” in the file structure where the file was left. Identity retrieval is when a file is retrieved by name. The third one is by Cooper more in-depth discussed and it is the attribute retrieval system. This finds files based on not name or place but rather what type of meaningful properties it possess. (Cooper, 2014)
Open, transparent, accessible governmental data
There are numerous ways in which open data and access to governmental information can benefit society and its citizens as outlined by Ruijer et. al. (2017) Access to information can give citizens better understanding about governmental processes and in effect make them more able to contribute to these processes. In addition to more active participating citizens open data can stimulate innovation and improve services. (Ruijer et. al, 2017. p. 45)
Ruijer et. al argue that the current open data platforms often show a common shortcoming in that they focus on data that are being asked for, not data that are needed to stimulate democratic processes. Another problem is that they are not sensitive to different roles or purposes users of the service can have. Ruijer et. al continue with presenting general requirements for a open data platform that include the usage context, the user groups different goals. (Ruijer et. al, 2017. p. 45)
