Exploration of the design space
This work has so far been written in a formal academic style. In this section and the following, however, I find it better to write from a first-person perspective. Even though I write from my viewpoint, and even though I try to represent stakeholders attitudes and positions adequately, this is in no way meant to be an auto-ethnographical presentation. Instead, it is better to read it as a journal of the design process.

This phase was about exploring the different opportunities that exist in the design space. I performed desktop research about migration law, participated in several related activities, interviewed people active in migration and asylum-related work and performed analysis on services and processes targeting asylum-seekers and refugees. 
Desktop research about migration law and processes in Sweden
While most of the material in this section already been presented in the theory section, some results are worth pointing out. The security and justness of the related formal and legal processes are hard to evaluate. It is possible (and likely) that there have been occasions where the asylum process legality been compromised. (Stern & Wikström, 2016)


In a documentary from 2016 Löfgren & Selo follows the young boy Ahmad as he goes through the Swedish asylum process. Again what is observed is long waiting times, few meetings with SMA, an unclear process, vague conditions for getting asylum, and depression and distrust as a result. (SVT - Löfgren & Selo, 2016)


Corroborated with the reporting from the radio program “Kaliber,” which highlighted an uncertainty in what documents and information are included in an asylum evaluation report, it would not be far fetched to believe that these factors could affect how the applicant perceives the justness of the process.
Participatory research
Engaging in Swedish Development Partner’s “language café” activity
Swedish development Partner (SDP) is a Swedish-based NGO working to aid people in need. In Sweden the arrange several activities for recently arrived refugees, asylum applicants in waiting for the result of their applications, and children arriving in Sweden alone.
The “language café” is one of these activities. The aim is to help first-time Swedish speakers to practice through dialogue in a relaxed way. Volunteers sit down with a group of Swedish beginner speakers and talk around a subject, selected by either the volunteer or the group members. Every session is around one hour, and it is an open activity where anyone can come and join. Some Swedish speaking skills are necessary to get the most out of the sessions, however. 


I attended two sessions in which I took the role of a volunteer. On both occasions, I had another more experienced volunteer that led the discussion, but I did participate fully in the discussions. I saw that it is a very natural dialogue driven way of practicing one's  language skills and that the social aspect of it seems to be quite important. When the volunteer and the group’s members connect through dialogue and trust is established, I observed that the second half of the sessions led to more focus on the volunteer answering questions about Swedish society and public institutions processes.
The rate of returning participants was according to volunteers and staff quite high, and several participants and volunteers knew each other. The event was held two days a week and even though volunteers shifted around regarding what days they could be there and there was no official scheduling of volunteers it seemed structured and continuous. Continuous in the way that participants could come and get a continuous connection with the same native speakers from week to week.


The volunteers I talked to gave different reasons for volunteering; some said that they just wanted to help, some had an interest in languages, some were students studying relevant subjects which benefitted from real-world experience/interactions, and others found that the discussions and interactions were meaningful for them.


Visiting Kontrapunkt
Kontrapunkt is a local independent NGO. They aim to work for human and asylum rights, social change and on a local scale create alternative social structures they want to see replicated in society. They do this by among other things having open activities such as “People’s kitchen” ( Sv.: “Folkköket”), a free meal for anybody who wants. They arrange asylum help sessions where people applying for asylum can go and get answers to questions about the process and what legal aids are available. They also have open nights where they open their locals for homeless people and a free shop where every item is free. They also have a varied range of workshop activities and open workspaces for its members. (Kontrapunkt volunteer introductory seminar, 2017)
I visited Kontrapunkt and attended one of their introductory meetings for new volunteers. I signed up for volunteering, and even though research through observation at the asylum help sessions was denied–citing ethical and trust establishing reasons–a couple of interesting notes came from the visit. Firstly, cooking and providing food was expressed to be used very deliberately as a “means of activism.” The possibility with food is that it can act as a community-building element and stimulate meetings between different people with different social background and standing. (Kontrapunkt volunteer introductory seminar, 2017)


A second note was their usage of a local alternative currency, called “Carma Capital” (Sv.: “Karma Kapital”). Whenever Kontrapunkt arranges club nights with music, dancing and alcoholic beverages the way to purchase drinks is done by first purchasing an amount of the local "currency." As of writing, this system has been limited in its usage to these specific events, but the expressed goal was to connect this currency to the rest of the organization's activities. For example, helping out in the kitchen could give you some “Carma Capital.” (Kontrapunkt volunteer introductory seminar, 2017)
The complexities of working with a local currency and the way such a system can influence and inspire social change are outside of the scope of this thesis. In the following section “Design process - Ideation” In the design ideation process I shortly played around with a concept around local currency and how it could benefit asylum applicants, but ultimately this came to lie outside the scope and the resource available for proper development, and it was subsequently discarded.


Taking introductory classes in migration law
The “Introduction to asylum and migration law” seminars were arranged by a student organization called The Asylum Law Students (Sv. Asylrättstudenterna). Practising lawyers working with asylum and migration cases held the lectures on migration law terminology, European and Swedish migration laws, the definition of refugees, and more. (Asylrättstudenterna - Introduction to asylum and migration law, 2017) Most of the legal aspects and how the processes work has already been presented in the background and theory sections. However, I want to bring up some interesting reflections made while attending two of these seminars.


The first reflection was about the constant stream of questions from clients about their cases. “We can spend 8h a day about our clients' cases and if any progress has been made.” (Sait Umdi, Cityadvokaterna Malmö. 9/3-17) Since the evaluation can take up to half a year from the time the interview is completed, practicing lawyers in the field gets a lot of questions regarding clients cases. The contact between SMA and the applicant in the asylum evaluation process where once again confirmed to be limited to a few occasions.
The reflections expressed in the ‘Introduction to migration law’-seminars together with the information received from interviews and desktop research, clearly indicates that the contact between SMA and the asylum applicants is lacking, either in its frequency, understandability, trust or case workers reachability.


Another thing explicitly brought up was the interview situation itself and how hard it can be to express their story adequately. If a person is untrained in verbally expressing themselves, then such a situation is unlikely to get a clear view of why that person needs protection and what evidence there is for this. (Asylrättstudenterna - Introduction to asylum and migration law, 2017)
Additionally, the person can be traumatized, suffer from depression, have an inclination to not trust interpreters, or have no trust in the evaluation process itself. These factors combined surely show a great danger of misinterpretation or misrepresentation of evidence.


Thirdly, the most common reason to deny asylum is that there is an option for internal refuge. This means that there are regions in the country being fleed that is safe for the applicant. Furthermore, most applicants that receive a negative decision appeal this. Even though in some cases there is no real possibility to have the decision reversed the applicants naturally want to explore every option there is. (Asylrättstudenterna - Introduction to asylum and migration law, 2017)
Structured and unstructured interviews
Interview with SMA
To understand more about the interview environment, the work process and the perspectives from an SMA case worker’s perspective I conducted a structured interview with a person working at the south region office. Most of the questions discussed in this interview have already been brought up earlier in the text but a discussion about what documents that could be presented as evidence by the applicant gave some interesting reflections. (Interview with SMA caseworker, 2017)
When the asylum applicant attends their interview, they can present any information they seem fit to prove their need for protection. For example a written letter from a teacher. However, since every case is evaluated individually the amount of evidence ascribed to these documents are also done on an individual basis. (Interview with SMA caseworker, 2017) This, coupled with the low frequency of meetings between case worker and applicant, would only make it seem naturally for a caseworker to overall give informal documents a relative weak evidence importance.


Interview with Swedish Development Partner
In addition to talking to SMA, I also wanted to engage NGOs, non-governmental organizations. I interviewed Kornelia Tofani at SDP about their different activities with a focus on their ‘Children in waiting’ activity. This is a group activity for parents and their children where they are separated into a parent’s group and a children's group. They then discuss events, thoughts, and feelings in order to give support and help them to cope with their situation. (Interview with SDP Tofani, 2017)


One season of the project also created a book called “We traveled here” (Sv. “Vi reste hit”). This small book collects two stories told and discussed at the meetings, but they are fragments and made up of several different real stories. The result is a therapeutic way of telling a personal story while at the same creating a feeling of that there are others that have gone through similar experiences. (BIV, 2012)


 20170506_164845.jpg 

Figure X: Page from “We traveled here”


We also talked about the general working environment in an NGO, cooperation between different organizations, the ability to influence processes regarding migration, about how long waiting times can affect the legal certainty of the process, and the importance of not being isolated and alone. (Interview with SDP Tofani, 2017)


Interview with Henrik Dalin, design lead IBM Interactive Experience 
In 2016 Dalin took the initiative–in cooperation with the Swedish Red Cross–to create a common information platform for all Swedish Red Cross activities. The end user product is an app called “Virtual Volunteer” that present helpful information, maps, activities, and locations in multiple different languages. It is aimed at both volunteers working in the field as well as refugees or other individuals who are in need of help and support. It is currently being rolled out in Sweden after a successful initial period in Greece. (Interview with Dalin, 2017)


 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 20.33.46.png 
 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 20.33.57.png 
 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 20.34.23.png 

Figure X: Screenshots from the “Virtual Volunteer” app


The interview with Dalin was varied and unstructured, but the focus was to understand better how it was to work as a designer in an NGO/refugee context and how much active user research that was conducted. In the development of “Virtual Volunteer,” the contact with the user group was handled by the Red Cross and Dalin and his team took care of the technical aspects of development. (Interview with Dalin, 2017)
Also discussed were some of my initial concepts for designs. One important point Dalin made was regarding design concepts meant to support and aid the user in a specific situation. It is fundamental that it can support before, under and after the design situation. (Interview with Dalin, 2017) It is less helpful to have a tool that is contextually bound to a specific situation and that the applicant cannot use it, or get used to it, beforehand. It is much better, sometimes necessary, to have a service that the users can explore and use under all different stages of the intended situation.


The discussion touched upon the difficulty in that the NGOs and technology/design industry have very different areas of expertize. NGOs often lack the necessary competencies or/and funding to lead innovation projects (with exceptions of course), and the tech/design industry tends to simplify complex socioeconomic and legislation problems. (Interview with Dalin, 2017)
Cooperation between several different NGOs in innovation development projects can also be difficult. (Interview with Dalin, 2017) This could be because of different goals, internal and external political issues, competing in funding, different ideologies, etc. While not explicitly discussed in the interview, the Red Cross, for example, have several types of unified information platforms. Refugee Buddy (http://www.rodekruis.nl/refugeebuddy) and Refugee App (http://refugeeaidapp.com/) are a couple of examples of information platforms/portals with the same goals and target users as Virtual Volunteer. This indicates a slightly scattered innovation development effort.

Benchmarking Swedish migration agency’s internet services
SMA have several sites to publish information, and they do this in several different languages. 


Migrationsverket.se
Migrationsverket.se is the main site for the SMA. Here a person can apply for several different permits and visas, check the progress of their case and book a meeting with a caseworker. They also publish news and information about the different processes. The site is available in many different languages, but the pages or information accessible in a specific language do vary. For example, Arabic and Russian only have specific information pages about certain areas, and even though the areas are the same, the amount of information on them can differ considerably. English has a complete translation except for the “Other operators” section, which is only available in Swedish. (Migrationsverket, 2017(3))


 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 22.02.13.png 
 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 22.02.51.png 

Figure X: Screenshots from Migrationsverket.se and the 'select language' options.


Lifos
Lifos is SMA’s database on legal data, country information and process guiding documents. This site is important for asylum cases because it contains SMA’s internally created process guiding documents, so-called “legal positions” (Sv. “Rättsliga ställningstaganden). Most data in Lifos is public, but it does also include some restricted documents.


 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 23.28.47.png 

Figure X: Screenshot from Lifos main page


There is a detailed search functionality where a user can search by using a lot of different parameters. Text search on title and descriptions, logic functionality (exclude words), keywords- country-  and source filtering, and from and to dates.


 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 23.29.43.png 

Figure X: Screenshot from Lifos detailed search. The right-hand side list shows different tags that are most frequently used. The top keyword “Hela databasen” reveals that the whole database contains 12571 entries (7 May 2017).


Neither the site nor the documents are translated. Many documents are written in Swedish, some are only available in English, and a few are written in German. There are also documents in other languages, mostly in other Nordic languages. There is no ‘help’ or ‘about’ that explains the content. It seems far-fetched that this site is usable by non-Swedish speakers.
Some summaries are removed when the information gets outdated and replaced. This is very unfortunate. For example, in an appeal information document that has changed, it might still need to be referred to. It is then made needlessly hard for the applicant and their counsel to retrieve the information that was previously there. 
There is limited or no metadata accessible when it comes to popular searches, newly created tags, removal or replacement of documents, etc. This is probably available internally, but Lifos do not have a publicly available API to search through.


Basic usability problems are also present, for example only ten results on each page are possible, and no alternative layout exists. The keywords can be unclear, and duplicates exist. The search logic function interface ('Exclude word' and 'Include word') is needlessly separated into several input fields breaking against current normal search practices of having logic functions connected to + (plus-sign) and - (minus-sign). This contributes to the overall complexity of the whole interface.
Since this is the main way to access these documents, the accessibility of it is an important consideration. If the documents in Lifos can affect the asylum process (which is the explicit intent of these documents), then anyone involved in the process should have equal access to them. Even if a caseworker is meant to follow these guides, and even though the public counsel will have access and understand them, inaccessibility to these documents can still decrease trust in the process.


Setelin
An innovation hackathon initiative arranged by Refugee Tech, Sthlm Tech and SMA led to the creation of Setel.in, a site for easy access to many different sources of information and applications. The purpose is to have new Swedes and people currently applying for visa/citizenship/asylum to simplify their introduction to the Swedish society. This site is at the time of writing available in Swedish, English, and Arabic. (Setelin, 2016)


 Screen Shot 2017-05-07 at 00.35.26.png 

Figure X: Setelin start page


In a news post from 6th of September 2016 SMA says “Sweden first with new platform to assist migration and integration.” (Migrationsverket, 2016(2)) This is questionable in at least one way and objectively wrong in another. Setelin is an information portal site that lists links sorted in categories such as “information,” “social” and “employment,” and while the links provided are good and valid, the accessibility is not. The translation of the site is limited to headlines only, i.e., the descriptions of the links are not translated. The links presented are also limited and too varied to be of any real interest, and no search functionality is present. To say that this platform “assist migration and integration” is very likely an all too strong expression.


Setelin is also not the first (digital) platform developed that aims to better integration and migration by collecting links. The site is created and administrated by volunteers with technical skills and passion for helping, without any disclaimed funding from SMA. The reason to bring all this up is not really to discuss an underdeveloped application but instead, shine a light on what type of project that SMA describes to be part of “social innovation.” (Migrationsverket, 2016(2))
As described below, I found a multitude of these information platforms aimed at helping refugees to find help with their applications, find jobs, language courses, etc. Many of them are not finished or are underdeveloped. At its best, these platforms can help a limited number of individuals. At worst they can fragmentize the potential for what a well-developed information platform can accomplish. With that in mind, it seemed to me that SMA's article about Setelin could be interpreted as suffering from 'tech-innovation naivety.'


Open data initiatives
SMA also publish some of their data under their ‘Open data’ initiative. The data available is the same as their published statistics documents but in the form of excel spreadsheets. The data, while usable and nicely formatted, is not very accessible. It access page is only available in Swedish while the documents are in Swedish and English (not completely translated, however); SMA only includes the latest datasets, and there is no API from which the data can be retrieved. While the data is open and available, a better data interface/API would make it accessible.


 Screen Shot 2017-05-08 at 17.53.04.png 
 Screen Shot 2017-05-08 at 17.52.23.png 

Figure X: Screenshots from “Open data” page at Migrationsverket.se (left) and example of open data excel document (right).


Information about Sweden-website
This is a website providing information and links. Not run by SMA but supported financially by them. Often referred to as a good source of information for anyone new to the Swedish society. It is available in ten different languages and seems completely translated. Links outside the page is however for the most part linked to Swedish or English sites. It has information sorted into categories such as ‘Learn Swedish’ and ‘Care & Health.' There is also a slightly hidden section ‘New in Sweden’ that have information about the different laws and processes relating to migration. Unfortunately, these link mostly to SMA’s own site (again only to the English or Swedish variant since Migrationsverket.se is not completely translated), or the links are broken all together and return a 404 site. (Information om Sverige, 2017)


 Screen Shot 2017-05-06 at 15.06.29.png 

Figure X: The ‘New in Sweden’ section at Information om Sverige website. © 2016 County Administrative Board of Västra Götaland
Design trends and efforts from the tech community
In this section, I analyzed and benchmarked a number of different designs and types of concepts. The result was three categories that I deemed to be the most relevant for the continued design process.


Information platforms
There have been many information platforms developed for use by refugees and volunteers. Some examples have already been presented above. The Refugee Aid app could be brought up as a positive example since it brings together several different NGO’s under one roof so to speak. Both the Red Cross and Doctors without borders, for example, have information published on that platform. (http://refugeeaidapp.com/)


Gray from UNHCR Innovation brings up several problems with such platforms. The article does not discuss this category only, but the problems I want to highlight are very prominent in this category. Distrust from the user base is very common, and refugees tend to want information from volunteers directly. (Gray, 2016) Since information in this design space is highly volatile and prone to change this is not surprising.
Another problem touched upon by Gray is the duplication of concepts. (Gray, 2016) Since design efforts are not coordinated but instead often stem from personal initiatives, duplication is to be expected. But this leads to wasted development time and fractured information. The last consequence is ultimately contra-productive when the end goal is a collected portal for information.


One service currently under development that could have a large impact is a chatbot for asylum seekers. It is using Facebook Messanger as the basis for its functionality, and The Guardian writes "The 20-year-old chose Facebook Messenger as a home for the latest incarnation of his robot lawyer because of accessibility. “It works with almost every device, making it accessible to over a billion people,” he said." (Guardian, 2017)
The same developer also created the “Do Not Pay” chatbot. (http://www.donotpay.co.uk) This has helped 160.000 British citizens to appeal their parking fines. (Guardian, 2017) Services like these, making public information transparent and accessible, has a lot of potential for reaching out to people not willing to browse arbitrarily bureaucratic governmental websites.


Communication/Networking tools
Refugees welcome (http://www.refugees-welcome.net/) is an initiative to match refugees with another person that can share their apartment or in other ways can provide accommodation. This initially created a lot of attention. But as of writing the number of matches made is only 936 total worldwide. The Swedish branch has matched 51 total from autumn 2015. (http://www.refugees-welcome.net/) (https://refugees-welcome.se/) 
Gray writes about Refoodgee, an app to connect refugees and locals by cooking together. Slow updates and a small user base is again a result of coordination difficulties, and lack of collaboration between the humanitarian and tech sectors. (Gray, 2016)


Ruben Pater writes 2016 a critical post regarding the “What design can do” design competition and the tendency by the industry to push design thinking as a universal problem solver.
"By emphasising the problem-solving capabilities of design, the WDCD Refugee Challenge supports the idea that the free market is much better at solving the world's crises than governments are. Design may be able to come up with clever products or enlightening ideas, but only governments and NGOs can provide refugees with the resources, infrastructure, and laws that are needed in the long run.” (Pater, 2016)
He continues “It is also absurd to suggest that design can come up with solutions for a crisis that is political and socio-economic at heart." (Pater, 2016)


Translation aids
Several apps are used to perform translation of phrases. These are in scope more focused than previous categories and are therefore not as susceptible to the problems raised above. The access to a smartphone is (to an extent) ubiquitous, and applications like Google Translate are very commonly used to translate phrases and words.
There are also designs like the ‘ICOON For Refugees,' a book with illustrations and commonly used icons to be used by refugees and volunteers to facilitate communication. The project was crowdfunded and released as a free app. (Amberpress, 2015)


 icoon-for-refugees-bildwoerterbuch-01-768x1024.jpg 
 icoon-for-refugees-free-app-android-AR-02-1-470x836.jpg 
 icoon-for-refugees-free-app-android-AR-03-1-470x836.jpg 

Figure X: The ICOON for refugees book and app. © 2015 AMBERPRESS


The images are ordered in categories such as health, accommodation, and travel. No information around adoption rate of this design or its effectiveness has been found, but similar illustrative tools are used in a healthcare context for making a preliminary diagnosis when medical personnel and patient do not speak the same language. 


Design process
Ideation
Design principles
As a result of the exploration of the design space I created three design principles. These principles would guide my choice of concept and how to develop that concept. 


  

Figure X: Design principles


1. The concept should aim to increase trust in the asylum process
2. It should support the applicant before, under and after the interview evaluation
3. It must give any possible advantage to the applicant
Service blueprint
For a complete overview of the asylum process as a service, I made a simple service blueprint. This is by no means a complete map over the process, but it helped the work when discussing the before, under and after design principle.


  

Figure X: Simple service map. The evaluation interview is marked out. 
Opportunities and initial concepts
Based on what the purpose of this work was–including asylum seekers better in the asylum evaluation process in an effort to establish trust–the initial concepts that could come from this were many. There were, in particular, a couple of examples that I originally saw as feasible and used as examples in contact with organizations and institutions.


Direct translation as control mechanism for caseworker
A first concept was created with the goal of giving the case worker some type of mechanism to possibly identify problems in translation. The idea was to have a computer analyzing the applicant's words and if specific keywords were found these were going to show up on the caseworker's monitor. If the interpreter would not mention anything related to the keyword, then either the interpreter misunderstood the applicant, or the computer analyzed the word in a wrong way. If the subject discussed was of a delicate type, for example, homosexuality, then the caseworker could ask the interpreter to ask the question in different words to get a better, and hopefully, more reliable understanding. 


  

Figure X: Illustration of keyword translation concept


This concept was discarded because it was meant to aid the caseworker. In discussions with, among others, NGO workers and legal guardians the issue of weighting the process was brought up. Anything or any tool that can drive decisions in a particular direction should only be made to give any possible advantage to the asylum applicant since they have the burden of proof. A concept that can be used only or mainly by an SMA caseworker could be ethically very difficult to design since the use of such a tool and the initiative to act on the result of the tool would be completely up to the caseworker.
Also from a service design perspective, this concept would fail to create a better service for the service consumer. It could not create a more just process. The issue lies in the trust between interpreter and applicant that repeatedly is pointed out to lead to the applicant not revealing important personal details. The asylum applicant–the service consumer–need to present evidence for their need for protection. 


There were also practical difficulties with developing such a tool. Access to the specific interview room, testing it with caseworkers, limited time to develop a prototype, etc.


Icon book for asylum interview 
This concept took a lot of inspiration from the “ICOON for refugees” book and other such concepts but would have targeted the icon set towards the interview situation. There are certain words and concepts that are hard to explain in some languages and an icon map showing these concepts could be helpful.


This concept would have several flaws, but the two most important ones were that it would not establish more trust since iconography also need to be interpreted and the concepts that are difficult to address with words may very well be difficult to express in abstracted icons/illustrations. Additionally, this would not be useful before or after the interview situation and would thus break from my design principles.


Better search of country information and decision guiding documents
The third concept was aimed directly at the asylum seekers and the public counsels, volunteers and other contact people helping them. If the data in Lifos was accessible through an API, a third-party search functionality could be built around it that was better suited towards usages by the applicants themselves. This could be further leveraged by incorporating machine translation of the summaries so that a larger group of users could understand the content of the different documents.


  

Figure X: Translation of Lifos documents


In addition to search functionality, the concept also allows for the creation of lists. These lists can then be downloaded, stored, shared or printed. The concept should also store summaries and documents deleted in Lifos as a secure reference (noting that they’ve been replaced of course).


The concept was selected to be the best concept following the design guideline as defined above. It can be used before the evaluation interview to find evidence and understand the process better. In the interview a list can be handed over to the interviewer as evidence and after it will be helpful to reference if Lifos removes any of their summaries. It is aimed at the applicant and individuals working with the applicant. It is also stipulated that transparency and understanding of a process increase trust in it.
Decided direction of continued design work
While doing participating research and desktop research, I found a couple of notable problems in regards to the praxis guiding documents. Lack of accessible data is a potential weak point when it comes to establishing trust in the migration process. Additionally, Lifos also removes outdated/replaced data posts, which could potentially undermine the legality of the process.


Even though the summaries and documents in Lifos are written in a formal language, the concept would enable applicants to be more aware of the documents that guide the process. This, in turn, could also support applicants to bring a list of the documents to include in the evaluation. Since the quality assessment discussed above questioned if these Lifos documents are included consistently in evaluations, then any tool that aids an applicant in the selection and understanding of these documents helps the process’ legally justness.


The concept direction taken was one that focused on the accessibility of Lifos data, storing it externally and translating it. 
Prototype
Translation service
One of the bigger focus points in making land information data more accessible for the different stakeholders was to have some form of translation in place. Since the concept needed to go through and parse thousands of smaller summaries and larger documents this could not be done by hand. Based on the current asylum seeker's country of origin (and the availability of Arabic speaking testers) the used language translation service needed to provide a fair translation of Swedish to English, Swedish to standard Arabic and English to standard Arabic. It also needed to be easy to use and not expensive.


Mistranslations make the use of machine translation very difficult in situations when clear and concise communication is needed. I believe this to be of lesser consequence on a prototype level and in the intended use case where the search is used to get an initial understanding of the content.
Structure
The concepts main structure is in four different parts, but the goal was to create a user interface that increased accessibility to Lifos data. Because of this goal we needed first to be able to extract data from Lifos or in some other way search through it. The two alternatives were to either build an interface on top of existing Lifos search functionality or to download the data to a custom database. Because of advantages in real-time searchability, a possibility of custom metadata, one-time translations and complete control over the dataset, the second alternative was adopted.
        Because of this approach, the server facing side of the concept needed three parts. A database, a crawler which iterated the Lifos database and downloaded the relevant data and a translation functionality. In the end, the translation was done with cloud functions for proper separation of purpose between the different programs and a more efficient crawl functionality.


  

Figure X: Program suite overview


Based on the prototypes need for a database, translation service, and hosting, the Google platform Firebase was selected. It contains all the functions needed and several features that make development easier. It is also scalable, affordable and connects directly with the Google Cloud Services that perform the translation.


  

Figure X: Example of console log messages from crawler


  

Figure X: Stored data hierarchy example
Interface
The interface was kept as simple as possible. I did this deliberately to identify the minimal amount of functionality needed for the described concept. It was also made to aid accessibility for different language speakers, unaccustomed computer users, and users with small-screen devices.


  

Figure X: First wireframe of the client search interface


A few exceptions were made while building the first prototype. The search button was removed to keep the layout as uncluttered as possible. The layout for the result items was simplified, and I also included the source and publication data under the title. The ‘tags found’ was also removed.


  

Figure X: Client page prototype


Since the search page was hosted live on the internet, I added an info icon (top left) that when clicked present some information about the project, a usage and data disclaimer notice and a contact email address.
  

Figure X: Comparison of Lifos detailed search and simplified search
Evaluation
An initial round of testing tried to validate the general layout and affordance of the interface elements. Directly following the testing an unstructured discussion around the prototype was performed. Three testers total were recruited, with different levels of understandings about the design context. Two of them have worked with human rights activism, with helping asylum seekers with application questions and engaging in local humanitarian aid projects respectively. The third tester had no previous experience with the design space. However, the testers were all-male and from a western cultural background. I found the tests to be adequate to finish a prototype and finalize a design concept, but continued development would need to conduct larger and more diverse users-tests.

I used Norman’s seven principles of design to assess the user’s perceived overall usability. After this, the aims of the concept and its intended use cases were explained, and the testers could comment on this as well. 
Results from first tests
The search functionality was found to be understandable. No one said anything about the “search”-button missing and had found the keywords easy to put in. However, the appearance likeness to Google’s “omni”-search (or "Omnibox"), created the same affordance in the testers. This seemed to make the keyword-only search slightly more confusing than necessary.
Sorting of result items was questioned. The prototype was expected (and intended) to sort the items on, date with the most recent posts higher up. Unfortunately, the placing of results was inconsistent and mixed up. Sorting by relevance was requested as was sorting out documents from external sources, only showing documents from SMA.


Comparisons between Lifos search functionality and the prototype gave different responses depending on the testers previous understanding of the area and previous contact with these documents. Testers with preexisting knowledge about the system said that Lifos own search included more search functions for finding relevant information. These two testers also understood the keyword search faster. The tester without pre-existing knowledge did not find Lifos search functionality helpful, rather intimidating and confusing. 
Some smaller feedback regarded how links should open in a new window was also expressed. Overall, when asked to explain the interface, the testers seemed to have understood the different elements of the interface and what they could do without too much problem.


After the initial questions and feedback, I presented a use case and explanation of the reasoning behind the concept to the testers, and they were asked to comment on this. The presented use case was that if an applicant does not have a public representation, then this concept could be a tool for both applicant and their legal guardian/contact person in finding, communicating and reference the Lifos documents.
The tester with pre-existing knowledge wanted to see three things to properly be able to use the concept. They needed the complete database to be available, more languages to cover more diverse asylum applicants and better sorting functions.
Prototype iteration
Based on the results of the first tests it was decided to develop the prototype and focusing again on the usability of the interface. The keywords under every result (that was in the first wireframe but not in the prototype). The wording in the search frame was changed, from “Search here” to only “Keyword,” and suggestion text was added to the side of the search box (“Suggested keywords: Afghanistan, Women, Practise”).
        The links were changed to open in a new tab/window. A common “open externally” icon was added to indicate this fact.
Final concept
The final concepts main change was the inclusion of a document list for storing specific results. It also includes better discoverability of keywords and a slightly clearer layout than the first prototype.


  

Figure X: Wireframe of final design


Too many languages would make it difficult to switch between them effectively. Therefore only five are represented here. There is probably a workaround with introducing customization into the concept and the ability to select which languages the user wants to see. No such feature has been incorporated in this version, however.


  

Figure X: List-view wireframe


A user can now click on the ‘add to list’ icon and store a specific document in the ‘document list’. The aim of the ‘document list’ functionality is to allow both applicant and counsel to store evidence/information references in a functional way for future reference. It could also be printed and given to the caseworker in the evaluation interview. How these printouts should be designed has not been completed, but it is likely that an “Include as evidence”-stamp should be present.
        Even while the list is open the language selectors are still clickable so even within the list a user can switch back and forth between languages.


  

Figure X: Search suggestions


Keyword discoverability is also enhanced by showing suggestions while the user types in letters. 