Discussion
"It’s no wonder that design is so often viewed as a self-aggrandizing profession. The model also assumes that the insight acquired by empathizing gives The Designer sufficient understanding to define and resolve The Other’s problems—even the world’s problems." (Wendt, 2017)


In an article from 2015 called 'Direct Response: How Tech Is Aiding The European Refugee Crisis' Neal Ungerleider writes on FastCompany.com–a magazine and web page about progressive and innovation in business–regarding the high numbers of refugees and how NGOs are using social media and e-commerce services to coordinate and communicate. "[they] are turning to social media and other novel tech methods to assist those in need." (Ungerleider, 2015) This is quite true but should not be surprising.
The article, written with good intentions no doubt, epitomizes the tech industry's preoccupation with thinking 'it' changes the world. It is naive and does not begin to cover the multitude of difficulties meeting refugees, volunteers, health professionals, migration workers and NGO's on a daily basis. The only thing that is happening is that communication services are being used by these people. The fact that some of its users are refugees does not implicitly mean that the companies running these services are helping refugees.


Ruben Pater acknowledges that the industries naive views can be one of insensitive communication. But he also notes that "WDCD says the refugee crisis is a global challenge too big for governments and NGOs alone, positioning design as the ultimate problem-solving discipline in a way that coincides with the narrative of neoliberal European policies." (Pater, 2016)


Still, people try their best to come up with better tools and services for vulnerable people in dire need. But the resulting design is at great risk to either miss what the users' needs are, how the design is affected by the political practices by host countries, or not adequately promoting its usage. One such example can be said to be quick-houses for refugee camps, from such companies as IKEA. The design allows for a house to be constructed in a day but misunderstands the need for such housing. It is true that refugee camps need better living conditions, but it is also true that many temporary camps are older than ten years. Quick houses then misunderstand the geopolitical difficulties that have stranded thousands of refugees and stops them from moving on.
Refugees are by definition in transit, on their way to shelter. Even though the reality often does not seem to reflect this (Calais, any African refugee camp), it can be quite tricky to find the correct channels in which information may live and can spread. Information needs to be constantly updated and if no update is made it should be controlled and marked as controlled. This because of the large datasets of outdated information already present.


There seems to be missing a large set of knowledge in the tech/design industry when it comes to migration and asylum. This is further enhanced by the fact that not many innovation projects are initialized by NGOs or other institutions. And lastly, what refugees need from a service perspective is sometimes contradictory to governmental processes and law praxis.
One approach is to embrace the thinking in design politics to help designer exercise introspection. To understand where oneself come from, the socioeconomic background and one’s cultural heritage. This should be made explicit, and differences between designer and user can then be overcome. Differences can even be a benefit when used in a diffractive analysis. Participatory research deepens the understanding of the design context and service design can be used to bring in a holistic approach to a very large design space.

Reflections on the design process
While working hard to create connections and engaging NGOs and SMA for participation opportunities there arose one larger problem. These organizations, as already discussed, can be unused to design and innovation projects. When approaching such actors, it is helpful to have examples, sketches or rough prototypes. I did not since I didn't want to preemptively define the design direction. Together with the sensitive setting, this led to a slow start and a prolonged exploratory phase. As a result, I did not complete enough design iterations. 
Another factor that was given a lot of consideration under the whole development phase was to not create something harmful. To not follow the industry saying “fail fast.” “Failing” in an ethically complicated context might not be such a good idea, but I should have allowed myself to fail more while developing the prototype.

Using activist methods informed the work to a great extent. Participating in activities was a great opportunity to challenge my personal pre-constructed views. It is very much possible to use these methods more efficiently and get much better data as a result. However, as used here, in an exploration of a design space, the limited number of activities were adequate to inform my design work in a positive and liberating direction.

Effectiveness of the design
The effectiveness of the design presented, or a concept similar to it needs to be evaluated in a real world scenario. The user tests performed in this work can only validate the UI and the design direction of the concept. Whether this concept could increase the experiential quality of trust between the case worker and asylum applicant, have not been verified. However, based on the participating research, the potential for increased legal certainty by having process guiding documents accessible seems fairly certain. 
