Conclusion
In this work, I have researched the current design effort that targets refugees. It has been shown that on the one hand there is a great rift between NGOs and other organizations understanding about what technology can offer, on the other a naive innovation push from start ups. If this design area continues to be approached as a market opportunity, then no real innovation will be achieved.

Anyone going into a project like this expecting to find the homogeneous user group “refugees” or “asylum seekers” would stack their odds for success against themselves. This is said knowing that the title of this work expresses the same flaw. “How to leverage asylum seekers ability to engage in the asylum evaluation process by increasing accessibility of governmental asylum process guiding documentation” is dangerously close to “How to help refugees using design.” But the name is not the problem; it is the actions a designer take (or not take). In this work, I have argued that the specific design context needs to be explored by participation, less objectifying observation. 


The final concept developed into an alternative search interface–coupled with an external database (external from Lifos own database)–which could be used by asylum seekers, public counsels, and other support persons to find, retrieve, discuss, and save data. 

There are several directions in which one could take this design work further. The most direct path would be to develop the current concept further and test it in a real scenario. A second way would be to take this work as an argument for political change in regards to how public data should be presented and what the term accessibility implies in regards to these documents. The third option would be to do more design research in this design space and leverage the potential for activism within design. A narrower design scope together with a continued focus on using action research methods is very potent.


There is no question that legal processes need expert help. Anyone going through a prolonged legal process, of any kind, will need guidance from experts. This is the role of a public counsel and the caseworker. That law and other legal and official documents are not translated into all languages (or other languages at all) is by no means unexpected or troublesome. After all, there are experts dedicating their entire lives to understand these laws and processes.

There is, however, a difference to common national laws and documents that exclusively guide processes with noncitizens. Since the quantity and open nature of these documents it is a good opportunity to use machine translation to, at the very least, give the target group some understanding about the process and the ability to actively engage and find information relevant to their process. It is activity versus passivity. This passivity is today forced upon the asylum applicant, and it is very much damaging.

